---
layout: chapter
title: Imagine
section-number: 1
chapter-number: 1
next-section: 2
date: 2018-08-02T07:00:00.000Z
categories:
  - book
  - chapter-1
tags:
  - money
---
> _Every revolutionary idea seems to evoke three stages of reaction. They may
> be summed up by the phrases:_

1. > _It’s completely impossible._
2. > _It’s possible, but it’s not worth doing;_
3. > _I said it was a good idea all along._



– Arthur C. Clarke

Imagine a nation with very little debt, low taxes and a balanced
budget. Imagine a nation where, like a family, we do our best for every
single citizen. Imagine a nation that provides health care, education, and
a minimum allowance to cover basic food and lodging. Imagine the relief
knowing that medical care is available if you or your family become ill.
Preventive care is available to all, and you can comfortably seek medical
help at the earliest sign of serious illness. When you’re seriously ill, you
might not have a private suite in a hospital, but you could always pay a
premium for one. Or – no imagination required – study the healthcare
systems of Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan...(and that’s just the ‘A’s.) 2
Imagine a nation where you can get all the education you want at
no individual cost, for yourself and for your children. You might not have
a premium berth in a prestigious private school, but you could always
pay extra if you want one. Imagine well-funded public schools in which
teachers make salaries commensurate with their extremely important
role in our lives and in a democracy. Imagine there are enough colleges
to accommodate anyone who wants to study. Or – no imagination
required – look at over 24 nations today that provide an education up
through graduate school to all their citizens: Norway, Finland, Sweden,
Germany, Iceland, Brazil and eighteen more. 3
Imagine a nation where everyone has good food on their table.
Everyone’s food is organic, because why would we want to feed any of
our citizens cardboard and a side of toxins in the name of efficiency
and profits? You can still have a box of donuts, a chocolate mousse, or
an especially sweet hybrid strawberry.
