---
layout: chapter
date: 2018-09-13T07:00:00.000Z
title: Next
section-number: 97
chapter-number: 10
next-section: 98
chapter-end: true
share: true
comments: false
comments-locked: false
left-aside: true
right-aside-top: true
right-aside-bottom: true
bottom-cta: true
download: false
pin-it: true
categories:
  - book
  - chapter-10
  - section-97
tags:
  - money
---
## Next

_There have been many times that I thought I finally understood money, only
to come across new contradictions, sometimes subtle and flagrant, that
showed me that, as in Godelian logic, the realm of truth is always vaster
than my framework for understanding it. None of the revelations of “what
money really is” were wrong: they were just partial, useful for certain kinds
of reasoning._
— Charles Eisenstein in Sacred Economics (2011)^7

_Me, too._
— Virginia Hammon (2018)

If you’ve made it this far, I hope you have enough understanding and
enthusiasm to take another step. This book is intended to start conver-
sations. Please take a look at some of the books mentioned and websites
that follow. Ask questions, and discuss this book at USMoney.US.

When I began this project nearly 10 years ago, the voices of new think-
ers were few and far between. Today new monetary theory is a hotbed
of activity. Conversations about a new money system for the world are
percolating across the planet. Commonwealth money is a hot topic
being discussed around the globe. Join them:

## United States

### Alliance for Just Money

Monetaryalliance.org

This organization grew out of the American Monetary Institute. When
founder Stephen Zarlenga passed away in 2017, the Institute board
decided they wanted the AMI to continue as a research institute. Many
active participants in AMI wanted to work aggressively for monetary
reform, and the Alliance for Just Money was founded in Summer 2018
by an energetic and devoted group.

### American Monetary Institute

Monetary.org

This organization was founded by Stephen Zarlenga (1941–2017), author
of the exhaustively researched and detailed history of money, _The Lost
Science of Money_ (2002). This book was a vanguard in the reassessment of
our monetary system, challenging the thinking of prominent economists
and setting a flurry of research and dialogue in motion. The website has
some good book reviews of other contemporary books about money, as
well as links to a number of papers by economists who have run models
of a new monetary system that support implementation. The Institute
holds an annual conference in September in Chicago.

### Full reserve banking

Fullreservebanking.com

This website has a good list of proposals for full reserve (100% money)
that have been made from 1933 to the present. The links include _The
Chicago Plan_ (1933), _100% Money_ by Irving Fischer (1935), to _Creating
New Money_ by Joseph Huber and James Robertson (2000). A few of
the links don’t work, but they point to a route down the rabbit hole.

### Public Banking Institute

Publicbankinginstitute.org

This organization was founded by Ellen Brown, author of _Web of Debt_
(revised 2012), and _The Public Bank Solution; from Austerity to Prosperity_
(2013). Ellen Brown has been prodigious in her efforts to continue to
study and learn and put monetary systems and their impact in a global
perspective. There are many informative and thoughtful essays on her
blog about recent events from a monetary perspective. The Institute has
been effective in getting local and state groups active in studying our
money system. As noted in Block 7.80, public banking will not address
the deeper systemic issues of a fractional reserve monetary system, but
the information here is valuable, and it can be a worthy bridge.

### Others

Please check the website USMoney.US for additional groups. They are
springing up like mushrooms and it's a challenge to keep this list updated.

## International Money Reform

http://internationalmoneyreform.org/

If you read in a foreign language, then this site has links to common
wealth money movements in Bulgaria, Croatia, Denmark, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, India, Israel, The Netherlands, Poland,
Portugal, Puerto Rico, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden. Below I’ve listed the
organizations with websites in English:

## Australia
http://www.fairmoney.org.au

## Great Britain

Positive Money, positivemoney.org

This organization was established by the authors of _Modernizing Money_
(2013), Andrew Jackson and Ben Dyson. They are social media savvy,
bright young economists who have created a trove of excellent mate-
rials on our existing system and common wealth money. The website
has some superlative little videos that make understanding money easy.
They have many downloadable PDFs addressing general and detailed
issues around changing our money system. Their books are models of
good nonfiction writing; well organized, clear and readable. There are
only minor differences between the British and US money systems, so
most of their videos and books apply to the US.

## Iceland

Monetary Reform: A Better Monetary System for Iceland

http://www.forsaetisraduneyti.is/media/Skyrslur/monetary-reform.pdf

## Ireland

Sensible Money, http://www.sensiblemoney.ie/welcome/

## South Africa

Firstsourcemoney.org/

## Switzerland

The Full Money Initiative, Vollgeld Initiative, [http://www.vollgeld-initiative.](http://www.vollgeld-initiative.)
ch/english/

## Seed it! – Spread the word

Let’s be pollinators. A functioning democracy must be founded on
a well-informed public. If each of us take responsibility for provid-
ing three people with this basic information about our money system,
and if you persuade at least two of those three to find another three we
could be well on our way to having a worthwhile conversation about
our money system.

## Be prepared for cognitive dissonance

We are literally and physically uncomfortable with information that
contradicts our assumptions, truths, and worldview.

The people we are inclined to look to for leadership on political, economic
and monetary issues have often spent their lives inside the belief system
that supports the status quo. They have built a life on their beliefs. Their
brains, in self-defense, may push them to repudiate anything that chal-
lenges their thinking. Be prepared to face substantial controversy and
enmity. Stick to curiosity rather than judgment. Start by gathering and
agreeing on facts and issues. Be clear about and understand the stories
that people are telling with the facts. Stick to respectfully questioning
and challenging other’s points of view.

## Tough fight

Those who are privileged by our current system are likely to hold very
tightly to their privilege. And, they have the power over our institutions
and control of media that their wealth brings. They will use it.

## Resilience

We’ve only got one planet. If we don’t make some changes soon, life as
we know it may be impossible for our grandchildren. Let’s move forward
with humility and call on our highest wisdom.

**WE can do this.**

## Corrections and requests for data

I’ve published this book in sections on the website, USMoney.US. If I’ve
made any statements you consider questionable, please comment in the
forum of the relevant section or message me on my blog, and present
your evidence. I’m happy to consider other points of view. If you think
I’m wrong about anything, please let me know and give me the oppor-
tunity to hear your reasoning. If I’ve made a mistake, I’ll correct it. I
want this to be informative and accurate.

I take to heart the story of the Blind Men and the Elephant. We can only
describe what we see from our personal vantage. I have done my best
to broaden my view by reading a great many books about our money
system. I find though, I have plenty of room to continue enriching my
understanding. Right up until press time, I have read new books that
opened my eyes to a new point of view. There is also confirmation bias.
Once one creates a framework for understanding, there is a tempta-
tion to make everything fit the theory. I am likely guilty, so call me on
it if need be.

## Thank you!

Thank you for reading to the end of this book! I’d love to hear from you.

If you’ve found my work useful, please pass it on to a friend, or better
yet, buy them a copy! Sales will help keep the website up and running,
and spread the word about our money system.

I hope you leave this book with an enriched understanding of money
systems. I hope you have a framework to assist in looking for the assump-
tions made by people who write more detailed and scholarly tomes.

## In conclusion

We can have a money system that creates a more perfect Union, estab-
lishes Justice, insures domestic tranquility, provides for the common
defense, promotes the general welfare, and secures the blessings of
Liberty to ourselves and our posterity. With the right choice, it may
seem like Santa Claus has come bringing health, joy and prosperity to
our nation.

## USMoney.US

Now, please come by, log in and help make change.

## Endnotes
10.94 Fresh Start
1 Eisler, Riane, The Real Wealth of Nations: Creating A Caring Economics. 2nd
Edition. Oakland, CA: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, 2008.
10.95 New Stories, Because Our Stories Matter
2 McEvers, Kelly. “Utah Reduced Chronic Homelessness
By 91 Percent: Here’s How.” NPR: National. December 10,

2015. ht tps://w w w.npr.org/2015/12/10/45910 0751/
    utah-reduced-chronic-homelessness-by-91-percent-heres-how
3 Qin, Yun.”Want to keep ex-cons from returning to prison? Give them a liberal arts
education.” The Washington Post. July 9, 2015. https://www.washingtonpost.com/
posteverything/wp/2015/07/09/want-to-help-prisoners-stay-out-of-jail-teach-
them-to-speak-chinese/?utm_term=.7c26a84c099a
4 Herrera, Tim. “Take Naps at Work. Apologize to No One.” The New York Times.
June 23, 2017. https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/23/smarter-living/take-naps-
at-work-apologize-to-no-one.html
5 LaCapria, Kim. “Do 643,000 Bankruptcies Occur in the U.S. Every Year Due to
Medical Bills?” Snopes.com, Updated January 15, 2018. https://www.snopes.com/
fact-check/643000-bankruptcies-in-the-u-s-every-year-due-to-medical-bills/
10.96 How Can We Make the Best Decision about
How to Give, Spend, Invest, or Lend Our Money
6 Peters, Thomas J. and Robert H. Waterman, Jr. In Search of Excellence: Lessons from
America’s Best-Run Companies. New York, NY: Harper & Row. 1982.
10.97 Next
7 Eisenstein, Charles. Sacred Economics: Money, Gift and Society in the Age of
Transition. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic books, 2011.
