---
layout: chapter
title: Not money
subtitle: 'Sharing, gifts & barter'
section-number: 13
chapter-number: 3
next-section: 14
date: 2018-09-12T07:00:00.000Z
share: true
comments: false
comments-locked: false
left-aside: true
right-aside-top: true
right-aside-bottom: true
bottom-cta: true
download: false
pin-it: true
categories:
  - book
  - chapter-3
  - section-13
tags:
  - money
---
To avoid confusion, it is helpful to clear away what money is not.
Sharing, gifts and barter are not money systems – they are resource
exchange systems.

## Sharing and gifts

Giving one’s surplus to those in need is one way to distribute
resources. The earliest societies functioned as sharing and gift
economies, much like families do today; everyone participates in
working and shares what they have. The difference between giving
and sharing is that giving assumes ownership by one party to the
transaction.

A gift is generally given without expectation of return. We have a
sense of fairness about overall giving and sharing over time, but a
gift is generally given without an expectation that something else will
be given back directly. Giving and receiving creates bonds between
people. Traditionally, giving is the norm within families and religious
institutions. Giving means, by definition, no money is exchanged. If
all we did was give and receive what we have produced with others,
we wouldn’t need money.

However, no large scale, stranger-including, gift-sharing economy has
ever existed. Certain events, like _Burning Man,_ practice a gift culture,
but this is not a sustainable economy that produces what it uses. The
Soviet Union attempted a sort-of gift economy; it removed as much
monetized exchange as possible and instituted centrally controlled
production and distribution of goods. But this interesting experiment
did not work.

Although giving and receiving is good, it is not an alternative to
a money system for the broader community. **We need a healthy
amount of giving and receiving to build and strengthen** community, and we need money because we exchange over great
distance and time. The choice of monetary system has an impact
on how robust the gift giving component is in a society (See 6.60,
Monetizing everything).

## Barter

Barter is also not a money system; it is a direct exchange between
individuals. I grow apples, you sew clothes. I give you a bushel
of apples in exchange for a new shirt. The parties involved decide
the value of whatever they are trading. In a barter exchange, the
participating parties determine the value of their goods or services in
relation to the goods the other party is offering.

Today barter is used from Craigslist to big business barter exchanges
to nations exchanging a commodity, such as oil they have in excess
supply, for the bulk commodities of another nation. However, the
value of the barter is nearly always measured by using money as the
measure of value on both sides of the exchange. Sometimes this
money as measure is the national currency, and sometimes it is a
currency unique to the exchange. This is because **money provides a
broader, community-wide context of value.** This is particularly true
of larger scale barter exchanges. Although barter can be a useful way
to make a trade, a barter-only society has never existed. Finding an
exchange that is satisfying and desirable for both parties is often time
consuming or impractical.
