---
layout: chapter
date: 2018-09-13T07:00:00.000Z
title: Bandages
subtitle: more laws
section-number: 79
chapter-number: 7
next-section: 80
chapter-end: false
discourse-page: >-
  https://forum.usmoney.us/t/backwards-bandages-and-bridges-7-79-bandages-more-laws/
share: true
comments: false
comments-locked: false
left-aside: true
right-aside-top: true
right-aside-bottom: true
bottom-cta: true
download: false
pin-it: true
categories:
  - book
  - chapter-7
  - section-79
tags:
  - money
---
More laws could function as bandages, slowing the hemorrhaging
as wealth flows from most of us to a tiny few.

## Use existing law

### Break up the banks deemed too big to fail

The simplest and most immediate action we can take is to break up
the biggest banks. They were deemed too big to fail in 2007–
when we bailed them out. Now they are even bigger: the five largest
banks have increased their share of the banking industry, adding $2.
trillion in domestic deposits over the past 10 years – a 180% increase.<sup>8</sup>
Almost half of America’s banking assets are under their control. In
2017 that left the other half to be divided up among 4,852 other
institutions.<sup>9</sup> A very small number of decision-makers have too much
control over our economy. The advantage to our nation of breaking
up these big banks far outweighs the advantages of scale to their few
shareholders.

The _2010 Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act_ includes a
means of breaking up the biggest banks. We need leadership with the
courage to use the law and break them up. Consider the courage of
your Congressmen at election time.

### Create $Trillion coins

Under established law and practice, the US Government creates our
coinage, and retains the seignorage. The US government could create
$1 billion or $1 trillion coins and use them to pay off all government
debt and/or use them to jump start our economy with spending on
infrastructure. This is one way to work around the privileges of the
private sector banks in our current system. Without changing any
laws, it uses precedent and the literal passage in our Constitution
about Congress’s power _“to coin money.”_ However, it would not put
an end to the exponentially growing money supply; the government
would join the exponential expansion folly, instead of actually
making a substantive change to the whole system. But, it could be a
useful short-term bridge.

## Tax Adjustments

### Bank taxes

Great Britain is considering a tax on the liability balance of the
banks (all the money they have created and promised to produce
on demand). Think of this as an insurance premium. If a bank has
liabilities over a certain amount, it must pay the government an
insurance fee to provide too-big-to-fail bailout insurance. Remember,
these banks use the seignorage on the money they create. A tax on
this money creation is one way to put a small percentage of the
seignorage into the public coffers. It is a tax in terms of how it would
be collected from the banks and put into the government account.
The US could implement such a tax.

### Wall Street transaction taxes

In the US there is talk about a tax on Wall Street transactions. Since
most of the transactions are now high speed and made on borrowed
money, this would cut down on the ratio of speculation to real
market exchanges and would _reduce the cost of everything._ This would
be an enormous boon to the Main Street economy. And of equal
importance, it could raise enough to pay for college education for
everyone who wants it (Bernie Sanders’ plan). This tax proposal
deserves a hearing. It would bring the number of speculative
transactions down to a level closer to a service, instead of a way for
wealthy financial gamers to gouge the rest of the nation.

### Individual income taxes

Since the system as-is tilts the playing field heavily to the benefit
of the very rich, it would make sense to return to the progressive
tax rates of 50–90 percent for the highest earners’ incomes over
$500,000–$1 million/ year – or whatever is the equivalent of 10–
times median income. These tax rates prevailed during the 1940s
through 1960s, when our economy prospered. Contrary to what the
one percent would have us believe, high taxes on the rich did not kill
jobs or slow the economy.

## Stricter banking laws

### Establish a modern version of Glass-Steagal

The _Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act_
(2010) tightened bank safety requirements. For example, it requires
banks have a ratio of 8 percent equity to assets, instead of the
2–4 percent common throughout the last 20 years of the 20th century.
However, as noted previously, US accounting standards allow banks
to keep so much off the books, their exposure and leverage is closer
to the old 4 percent. Additional laws could limit the scope of bank
holding companies (corporate entities including both money creator
deposit banks and risk-taking investment, insurance, hedging and
trading financial agencies) and put a damper on banks’ lending to
their own investment friends. New law could be an update to _Glass-
Steagal_ that closes any loopholes allowing our highly secretive and
off-balance sheet shadow banking sector to play the system. However,
the Republican platform states that getting rid of _Dodd-Frank_ is
high on its to-do list, and reducing instead of increasing financial
protections is already happening under a Republican Congress and
president. These actions are amplifying the size of the next crash.

If we want to keep the existing system, it would be prudent to tighten
the standards, rules, regulations, and oversight, so that our entire
economy has a chance of pulling back from the looming brink of
collapse. But, look at the exponential curve and share my concern
that only systemic change can block a catastrophic meltdown.

### More watchdogs with Integrity

Crony corruption is entrenched in our watchdog agencies. We
can fund the watchdog agencies at a higher level. I like the idea of
a standard one percent budgeted for all government spending to
pay for an ombudsman, inspectors, and experts in fraud detection,
monitoring and compliance. It would save us in the long-run.

We can write laws requiring watchdog agencies be staffed with people
without a past or future conflict of interest; someone cannot move
back and forth between a regulatory position and the regulated
businesses. We could make a law requiring our watchdogs commit
not to work for the industries they regulate for at least five years
after they leave watchdog service – and then pay them well enough
to make this level of integrity worth their while. All too often
government employees are recruited during their government service.
Then they make rulings favorable to their future employer, quit, and
step into the lucrative payoff job in the private sector.

In August 2018, Senator Elizabeth Warren presented a comprehensive
plan to reduce corruption in Washington that is worth attention.

## Bring the shadow banking sector into the sunlight

The banks currently run operations off their balance sheets that may
represent a third to half of their exposure and banking activities. A
money creator bank, with our entire economy in its hands, should
not be allowed to keep anything off their balance sheet. If they’ve
exposed themselves to a liability, no matter how tangential, this
exposure should see the light of day, front and center. It might need
to be in a new column or category on the books, but there is no way
a marketplace has any level of free choice when the people creating
and manipulating our money and financial systems are allowed to
hide their actions and their true status in the footnotes.

## Adjust the Fed system

### Cut dividends on capital stock

Currently, the private banks are paid 6 percent annually on their
shares in the Federal Reserve System. These shares are the capital
stock purchase that the banks are required to buy to belong to the
system. They are currently guaranteed a 6 percent annual dividend
on these shares. This expense is deducted from the seignorage on
the central Fed’s money creation, before the net is passed to our
government.

Some have suggested this dividend be reduced to 5 percent or less.
This would be a reasonable way to tilt the balance back a little toward
the common wealth. According to the 2014 Fed financial report, a
cut of one percentage point would send another $281 million to the
government. That is not much. Since bankers reap considerable
benefits from belonging to the Fed – in addition to bankers’ privilege
of money-creation power – why should the member banks get a
guaranteed return on their membership investment at all? Why isn’t
the share price the cost to belong, with no further annual dividend
benefits? In 2014 cutting this payout entirely would have put an
additional $1.7 billion into the government account – a slightly more
equitable sharing of seignorage on the money that banks create.

### Cut interest on reserves

In 2006, Congress passed the Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act,
which among other things authorized the Federal Reserve to begin
paying interest on certain types of reserves held by their member
banks. This was intended to give the central Fed more control over
the interest rate at which the banks lend to each other (federal
funds rate). It was intended to encourage an increase in the level of
reserves the banks kept, without a regulation requiring a higher level - carats, instead of a stick. There is little evidence it is providing the
    control the central Fed wanted, but it is another candy jar for the
    member banks.

For the 50 years prior to this 2006 law, banks kept about 10 percent
more in reserves on deposit with the Fed than required. While this
new interest payment is small – 0.25 percent – it encouraged the
banks to increase their deposits astronomically. In 2007, when this
interest incentive to hold reserves was new, the banks kept an extra
$1.8 billion in reserves over a required $43 billion – an addition
to their surplus of about 4 percent, all earning them interest. By
2012, banks’ required reserves increased to about $100 billion – a
terrifying doubling of their overall assets and money creation in just 4
short years!<sup>10</sup>

Equally astounding, their excess reserves earning interest averaged
$1,500 billion! – more than 14 times their required deposits! By 2014
the Fed was paying out $6.9 billion to depository institutions on
reserve balances and term deposits. This has been another way to soak
up the incredible amount of new money the banks are creating, but
it is once again a boon to the bankers and a drain on the public and
taxpayers. In essence, banks get paid to create money and keep it in
their account at the central bank. This money is not circulating or
benefitting anyone except the bankers.

We could change the law and remove this interest. But if the banks
are no longer earning interest on these reserves, they have no
motivation to keep them at the Fed. If they move this very large
sum of money into the economy, we will see a spike in inflation
previously moderated by the hoarding of these reserves. The interest
payments on reserves created a bigger problem than they solved. This
maneuver may be a reason the next meltdown has been postponed,
but now we are over a barrel paying these billions to the bankers for
money they have over-created. Truly, the only way out of this box
may be to change the money system entirely to a common wealth
money system.

### No Interest Government Debt

Currently, WE the people borrow money from the Fed. The Fed
creates new money for our government. We pay interest on this debt
to whoever holds it: to the Fed if they hold it on their books; or to
foreign nations; or to the general public.

From 2006–2016 the Fed purchased and held almost $4 trillion in
assets on its books, of which $2.6 trillion are securities from the US
Government. The US Government is paying interest to the Fed on
those securities (IOUs). The Fed subtracts its expenses, including
paying required 6 percent earnings to its member banks and interest
on their member banks’ reserves. Then it pays the net back into the
government coffers. This is an unnecessary merry-go-round. We
do not need to follow this convoluted process or pay interest on
government debt to the Fed. The Fed earns plenty of money in other
ways to cover its expenses.

Congress could pass a law that US government debt securities
currently held on the Fed’s balance sheet will no longer accrue any
interest. They could still be bought and sold by the Fed to change
how much money is in the economy; they will simply no longer pay
interest. This might reduce the number of potential buyers and it
might not. Because of insecurity and instability in the global banking
system, many governments have been considering negative interest
on their bonds. Negative interest means people are paying to have
an IOU from a government, instead of earning interest on it. This
sounds crazy, but when financial markets are volatile and it’s possible
to lose up to half the value of your asset, paying to have a government
bond may be a good deal. Again, think about where we are on that
exponential curve.

Or, just as the Fed creates money to buy the debts of banks and
private companies, the Fed could begin to buy up all available US
government debt and keep it on its balance sheet. Congress could
wipe out any interest accrual on this debt. The problem with this
100% buy back solution is it doesn’t go far enough. As long as the
banks can continue to create new money, which they will do at
the same exponential rate they do now, then as the Fed purchases
government debts, more money will flood the economy. This would
have an impact on the value of our currency; it could cause inflation.
And the inflation would be inaccurately blamed on the Fed’s creation
of money by buying government debt, and NOT on the private
bankers’ continuing creation of new money. It would also deprive
the banks of a cash equivalent asset, and leave them scrambling to
strengthen their balance sheets.

Substantial foreign holdings of US debt undermine our ability to
make economic and foreign policy in our nation’s overall best interest.
Foreign governments can threaten to sell and flood the market with
their extensive holdings of US debt. Generally, this would not be
good for either party, so they would likely refrain, but the fact they
can make serious threats means they can blackmail us into undue
consideration of policies serving the interests of other nations and of
the global money powers. Buying back our government debt from
foreign powers would put us in a better position.

After the Fed, the largest holdings of US public debt belong to
foreign nations ($6.3 trillion, December 2017). The top three
nations are:

* China – $1,185 billion
* Japan – $1,062 billion
* Ireland – $ 327 billion

According to the Fed, in 1980, foreign and international investors
held $118.2 billion in US government debt, when our GDP was
$2,863 billion. Debt held by foreigners was equal to 4 percent of
GDP.<sup>11</sup> In 2016 with an $18,570 billion GDP, foreign investors held
$6,006 billion – a sum equal to 32 percent of our GDP – a red flag.

Another benefit of a debt-free government is a decrease in the cost
of government. As noted previously, currently 17 percent of our
taxes paid into the government operating fund go to pay interest on
government debt. As this interest diminishes and vanishes, taxpayer
money could go towards services and/or reducing taxes. Either way it
puts money into Main Street through government service spending,
or through tax reductions.

## Allow competition in transfer services

The British central bank, The Bank of England announced in June
2016 it will be adopting a policy change allowing non-bank payment
service providers to hold accounts at the Bank of England.<sup>12</sup> This
means financial technology companies can compete directly with
banks in providing transfer, storage and accounting services. This
competition is likely to demonstrate that payment-transfer services
can be provided cost-effectively without the power banks have to
create money. The US could do this, too.

## Same-same

### Do what we’re doing – get what we’re getting

If we keep our system, even with increases in regulation, we will still
have the boom and bust cycles and be heading up an exponential
curve toward total collapse. New regulations will only stretch out the
time between cycles and put off collapse for a few years.

Let’s discuss these bandage strategies, assess the pros and cons of
implementation and compare their cost to a whole system change.
