---
layout: chapter
date: 2018-09-12T07:00:00.000Z
title: 'A basic, 100% bank'
subtitle: Safe storage & transfer
section-number: 25
chapter-number: 3
next-section: 26
chapter-end: false
share: true
comments: false
comments-locked: false
left-aside: true
right-aside-top: true
right-aside-bottom: true
bottom-cta: true
download: false
pin-it: true
categories:
  - book
  - chapter-3
  - section-25
tags:
  - money
---
Basic banking is a business like any other; a basic bank has its own
capital on hand to start up the banking business, and it charges its
customers a fee to cover the cost of services. The bank sets its fees,
and like any business in the community, it must compete for your
business by providing better service or cheaper service, or both.

A basic banker keeps fund accounts – a separate account for the
bank’s own business funds and separate accounts for each of its
depositors. Your deposit is your money and the bank cannot touch it
without your instructions. The bank must keep 100% of your money
on hand unless otherwise instructed by you. So this is called a 100%
banking system.

## Storage and transfer services

How does it work?

Let’s say you put $100 into your account at the bank. Then you use
your debit card or use your phone app to make payments to others.
You are essentially instructing the bank to transfer money from your
account to someone else’s account. The bank is facilitating your
transactions and providing security for the transfer. These are services
that cost them money to provide. When you get _free_ checking and
money transfer, you can be sure you are paying for the service in
some other way.

As far back as the Bronze age (2,500–800 BC), government often
provided this service. For example, the central governments of the
Babylonian, Egyptian and Chinese empires, provided storage and
transfer bank services to facilitate trade in the copper and tin required
to make bronze, as well as other goods from faraway lands. Today
both private and government banks exist.

If the person receiving your money banks at the same bank, the bank
can debit your account and credit their account. The transfer of your
money that you demanded is an accounting entry, not the physical
movement of money from one place to another.

If there were only one bank on the planet, aside from the 2–3 percent
of the money supply that is cash, 97 percent of the money supply
would never physically move anywhere. It would be a matter of
an accounting entry moving it from the account of one person to
another. If you considered only how much money literally goes in
and out of this planetary bank – zero to 3 percent (cash), you might
say, “Gee, there is all this excess money just sitting there in this bank not
being used.” You would be wrong. That money is freely circulating
and represents the money supply available. It is simply moving from
one account to another, sitting for varying lengths of time in different
accounts.

Of course, we have many banks. If the recipient of your money
banks at another bank, then the bank must move your money to the
other bank. Customers of the nearly 7,000 banks in the US send and
receive money all day long. All this money moving from one person
to another is part of the money supply. However, the banks can wait
until the end of each day, total up all the money they must send to
another bank and all the money they will be getting from that bank,
then they move only the difference. The bigger the bank and the
broader their reach, the smaller the difference. The money moving
from one account to another, and the net moving from one bank to
another is all in circulation as part of the money supply.

This end-of-day net transfer used to take place physically. Money
would be loaded onto a truck and moved to the bank with a positive
net. As you can imagine, it was risky. It was also costly and a nuisance
to hire an armored vehicle to haul the net difference from one bank
to another. So, banks did not settle their accounts every night. Not
too long ago it could take weeks to transfer money from bank to
bank – for a check to clear.

## Basic central banks

But, banks figured out a way to make paying the net they owed
to other banks easier. They realized just as they only needed an
accounting entry to move money from one of their depositor’s
accounts to another account in the same bank, if they created a
bank to the bankers, in which all the banks had deposit accounts,
they could do the same with their net transfers at the end of the
day. Central banks increase efficiency, and reduce transfer and
security costs.

Banks have been getting together to create a central bank for nearly a
millennium. A central bank can belong to a government or be owned
by the private banking sector it serves. The earliest central banking
systems belonged to the governments of empires. Early privately held
banking systems belonged to tightly knit families or religious groups,
whose paterfamilias manned the central or main bank, while brothers,
children and cousins managed their global banking empire branches.
(e.g., the Italian-Catholic Medicis in the 14th century, the German-
Jewish Rothschilds in the 18th century, and the Quaker-Scottish
confederacy of merchant bankers in the 19th century. Please note: the
all-too-common idea that banking cabals are an exclusively Jewish
invention, with the Rothschild family in particular controlling the
world, is misinformed anti-Semitism.)

If the central bank is privately owned, each member bank must put
up some capital, generally in proportion to the amount of its own
shareholder equity. In exchange for this capital, each member bank
is given shares in the central bank and will have a right to a share of
the profits from this central bank’s operations. In a publicly owned
central bank in a 100% system, the individual private banks would
pay for the services of their central bank, just like you would pay for
the services of the bank holding your personal account. A publicly
owned central bank could price its services to be non-profit or
for-profit.

Member banks keep a deposit account at the central bank, just like

you keep a deposit account at your bank. In a 100% banking system,
an individual bank keeps enough of its depositor’s money on hand
to cover its customers’ cash needs and keeps the rest of its customers’
money in a depositor fund account at the central bank. The member
banks may keep their own capital in their own bank or have a
separate proprietary bank account with the central bank for these
funds. For the banks, this is comparable to you keeping a certain
amount of cash in your pocket, while you put the rest in the bank.

With a central bank, at the end-of-day settlement, when one bank
owes depositors’ funds to another bank, they instruct the central
bank to move money from their depositor account to the depositor
account of the other bank. No physical money needs to move
anywhere; the central bank makes an accounting entry, debiting the
banks that owe, and crediting the banks that are owed. The fact these
net amounts may be small does not mean the rest of the money is not
in use as an active part of the money supply; it is not inactive _excess._

In a 100% basic banking system, the amount of money available for
transfer will always be enough to cover the draws from other banks
because 100% of depositors’ money is held in trust accounts – either
at the home bank or the central bank. Whatever money you deposit
remains your property and the bank simply provides the services of
safe storage, accounting and secure transfer. Any inadequacy would
be the result of theft or fraud on the part of the bank. Whatever
money belongs to the bank itself will be kept in its own set of
proprietary accounts. This is called fund accounting, when honesty
and integrity require keeping people’s money in separate accounts
from the proprietary accounts of the bank.

In a 100% bank system you would expect to pay a fee for the services
of the bank, just as you do with any other business that provides
a service.

## NOT OUR SYSTEM

Some of these aspects, such as the role of a central bank, apply today.
However, this basic 100% model is not in use today. This is a choice
we could make.
