---
layout: chapter
title: Roots
subtitle: an early history of money
section-number: 14
chapter-number: 3
next-section: 15
date: 2018-09-12T07:00:00.000Z
share: true
comments: false
comments-locked: false
left-aside: true
right-aside-top: true
right-aside-bottom: true
bottom-cta: true
download: false
pin-it: true
categories:
  - book
tags:
  - money
---
## An abstract, social innovation

Money is a profound and extraordinary social innovation. Like
language, it is abstract and social, with physical aspects (currency in
the case of money, and spoken or written in the case of language).
In essence, though, a money system and a language are abstract
social tools.

History tells us money has been essential to groups of people
functioning in community. Families and very small sharing
communities can get by without money. But for at least the last
5,000 years, with a few exceptions, people have been living in larger
societies that developed in significant part as a result of having
something they used as money.

## Why money?

How did we end up using money when we make exchanges? Let’s
take a brief look at the history of money. Keep in mind the Sufi story
of the blind men and the elephant. Money evolved with roots in at
least four aspects of human nature:

1. We compare and measure;
2. We give and take;
3. We have a sense of equity and fairness;
4. We live in communities with some form of government.

We developed units of measure and wealth that eventually became
quantifiable standards to satisfy these aspects of our nature.

These units of measure and treasure emerged as money from:
- IOUs – an account of exchange that requires relationship, trust or
    authority;
- Indirect barter – tangible tokens with their own commodity
    value in the marketplace, no relationship or trust required; and
- Tokens and symbols of power.

## A measure

Humans are built to measure and compare; it is fundamental to
how we learn and think. We also have a built-in sense of fairness and
equity. This led to the standardization of our methods of measure,
including money, our medium of exchange. We went from, _“I’ll take
an arm’s length of fabric,”_ to _“I’ll take a yard of fabric.”_ We went from
being simply indebted for a kindness – _“I owe you one, friend”_ – to
owing a unit of a specific thing. I owe you one cow. I owe you two
bushels of wheat. I owe you one gold sovereign. I owe you $1. Just as
early measures of physical distance began with a reference to a body
part – a foot or an arms-length, the measures of wealth began with
a reference to some physical commodity – a day’s portion of grain, a
cow, a measure of precious metal. Measures have evolved over time to
represent an abstract concept of measure. Our minds build up files of
reference that give the abstract measure meaning.

In early large cultures a central religious or political power collected
tribute from its citizens. As cultures grew larger, the tribute
requirements became more specific. A payment or tribute of one
cow to an overlord was a one-time offering, and hence, not money
by definition. However, as tribute was standardized in larger
communities, becoming what we now call taxes, the unit of demand
became a standard measure of value. Because this unit could be
used to pay one’s tribute or tax to the temple or government, it had
a secondary value in the marketplace. A cow or a coin that could
be used to pay one’s taxes was valuable to everyone who needed to
pay taxes.

At some point people began using a certificate of ownership to
the unit of measure (a portion of wheat or cow), as a medium of
exchange in the marketplace, becoming money. Serving as a measure
is one part of the path to money. When a token is designated for
paying one’s required measure of dues or taxes to government it is
called, legal tender. When a token is broadly used for exchanges
within a community, and used to pay one’s measure of contribution
without the formal structure of a law, tax, or fee it is called,
common tender.

**Money can come into being as a standard measure of wealth
or value.**

## IOUs

Informal personal IOUs have probably been a part of life in every
community throughout history. People promised to do things in the
future for others and we kept track – in our heads, until relationships
grew too complex or too many. Then quantification and writing
emerged. _“Lend me your billy goat in late winter and I’ll give you a kid
in the summer.”_ _“Give me a bushel of wheat seed in spring, and I’ll give
you back two bushels of wheat in the fall.”_

The earliest known written IOUs are clay tablets used in Mesopotamia
over 5,000 years ago. They were property receipts and accounts of
promises or pledges. Some examples by conjecture:


PROPERTY RECEIPT: You have deposited 100 bushels of wheat in the
community storage silo and can take out 80 bushels of wheat over the next
winter. (PS. I’m taking a share of your wheat for storing and protecting it
for you.) The King.

PROMISE: In recognition of your 12-hour day working on building
the new temple, here is a token for a daily ration of rice. The Temple
Authority.

PLEDGE: You have given me ten yards of beautiful fabric you have woven, which I will carry to the Big Town and exchange for an assortment of
exotic spices (less my commission). I give you my cow in pledge. If I fail to
come back with your goodies, you can keep my cow. Trader Joe.
People are creative, and probably as soon as someone had an IOU
from someone else, they found they could exchange the IOU for
another good or service. This transferable use of the IOU itself as
a means of exchange is, even today, called the monetizing of debt
(or credit). In order for these IOUs to become money, people had
to trust the party issuing the IOU would be good for the debt, no
matter who called to collect it. This requires an agreement broader
than individual-to-individual; it generally requires a community
wide agreement of trustworthiness of some sort. **This agreement of
trust and transferable value is what distinguishes money from an
ordinary IOU.**

**Money can come into being as a record of an IOU.**

## Indirect barter – tangible marketplace value

As people traveled great distances for trade and conquest, making
exchanges required a means that did not depend on trust, local
authority or previous relationship. If you were traveling a very long
distance to trade with strangers, you would take the most durable,
highest value for size, tradable commodity. Precious metals, which
were used for weapons, utensils and decoration throughout the world,
were good choices for bartering with distant strangers – as were salt
and spices. You could carry a durable item of high value in relation to
its size.

In the same way an IOU could be monetized (turned into money) and
used by a local population for making exchanges between people not
named by the IOU, these pieces of metal or other commodities were
passed around as a medium of exchange by people who did not really
want to use the metal themselves, becoming a form of money. This is
the monetizing of a commodity.

As bits of metal came into broader use, it became important to quickly judge the quantity and quality of the bit of metal that one
was exchanging. Coins developed as a way to give a literal stamp of
authenticity, quality and quantity, making their use as money easier
for everyone. Gold, silver, and copper are the primary commodities
with a sustained use as money.

Using precious metals for money is distinctly different from using
IOUs. Gold, silver, and copper are tangible tokens that have a
commodity value in the marketplace. It does not require a trust
relationship; traders can establish weight and purity independently.
This makes its use more like barter in that each party can
independently establish the value of their side of the exchange. For
example, using gold coins is essentially indirect barter, and every
exchange carries two layers of value calculation: the values of the
actual items to be exchanged, and the value of gold in the open
marketplace. Although individuals making the exchange may appear
to have more freedom and independence in establishing value for
the exchange, in fact, they are constrained and manipulated by the
broader market value of the commodity, and those who control it
(Chapter 4.28).

**Money can come into being as a commodity.**

## Symbol and pillar of power

It is human nature to organize into communities and to establish
some form of governance. For communities to prosper there must
be some way to resolve conflicts and to decide how resources will be
distributed. Over the past few thousand years we’ve tended toward
larger and larger communities under one government. All around the
world, beginning about 2,500 BCE, we shifted into an age of empires.
How did these big empires control such large territories when travel
and communication took so long? Big armies were – and continue
to be – the primary means. But how do big armies get paid over vast
territories?

The age of empires coincides with the timeframe in which precious
metals became a form of standardized money in widespread use.

Consistently, the prerogative for coining gold belonged to the priests
of these empires, and silver and copper to the civil authorities, or to
provincial governors. For rulers, stamping coins with their own image
was a means of announcing and establishing their authority, and by
assuming this money-creation privilege they maintained their power.
Coins were an informative symbol that would be widely broadcast,
and a means of exercising power. The authority with the power to
create money could spend the coins into widespread use, and demand
some of them back in the form of taxation.
Money historian Alexander Del Mar presents considerable evidence
that the stamp of the ruler on the coins was more important than a
weight, which often varied over time and distance, or a commodity
value for the coins. For example, the 5th Caliph of the Umayyad, Abd
al-Malik Ibn Marwan, made a deal with the Byzantine Empire under
Justinian II to pay a tribute of 1,000 gold solidi or dinars per annum
for ten years. For the first six years al-Malik paid with gold coins he
had minted to copy those of the Byzantine Empire. In 695 AD, he
struck coins with his own image and sent them to Rome for tribute,
whereupon, Justinian declared war. It wasn’t about the actual value of
the gold, it was about the power it represented. Usurping that power
was considered an act of war.^1

**Money can come into being as a token, symbol and pillar
of power.**

## Hybrid

A measure, an IOU, indirect barter and power symbol have all played
a role in the development of money as we know it today. Most money
has been a hybrid. For example, the earliest forms of metal money
were measured as debts of grain or cattle and even bore the names,
_bushel_ and _cow._ And, for at least the past 700 years, nearly all widely
used gold systems of money have really been IOU based systems, with
only a fraction of real gold in reserve.

Nearly all money in widespread use has been established by the authority of some form of governance – whether that be a dictator or
a cooperative common agreement.

## Economists tell a story

### Foggy mists of time and the baby of barter

Economic textbooks often tell a story of a mythical community of
people using barter. The people in this mythical community figure
out it is difficult to find the right exchanges with barter, and so they
choose a common commodity such as cattle and grain as a form of
money. Through marketplace competition, metal wins as the best
commodity to use for all exchanges because metal is durable and has
a high value to size ratio. The story says that _true_ money is born as
a commodity in the marketplace of free trade. Here’s an example of
this story:

_Money and the payment system have evolved over time. The earliest forms of
money were commodities, such as cattle and grain, that came to be used as
means of payment and stores of value, two properties that effectively define
money. Over time, precious metals, specifically silver and gold, became
dominant forms of payment._
- Federal Reserve Governor Laurence H. Meyer, 2001^2

Unfortunately, Governor Meyer and far too many of his colleagues
are over simplifying and have an incomplete view of money. The
earliest forms of money were not commodities; they were _receipts_ for
commodities. Communities rarely passed around a cow or a bushel
of wheat to facilitate exchanges; they passed around a receipt or IOU
for cattle and grain – or some form of information about current
ownership. Or they simply kept accounts of giving and taking,
settling balances at some point in time with a standardized measure
of value. The early forms of metal money carried the names of
quantities of grain or cattle because they were an effort to standardize
value and were receipt money in a form readily carried and preserved.
Some early forms of money were divisible by 30 or 60, representing
chits for daily portions of food. **The standardizing was done by** an authority, such as a wealthy person, a religious leader, or a
governing power, not in the marketplace.

These early receipt-IOU moneys were about relationship, authority
and trustworthiness. Metal was chosen for the receipt because it was
more durable than a clay tablet or a piece of parchment, but early
materials used for the receipts were not valuable in and of themselves.
This metal receipt got its value, not because it was a commodity, but
primarily from the receipt, promise, IOU it represented, and from the
agreement of people to use it as a medium of exchange. (For example,
20 pieces of metal money = 1/2 cow.) For thousands of years the
religious or political leader established that agreement.

Over time, metal used for coins shifted from metal of little value to
metal of greater value in the commodity market, becoming a hybrid
of receipt and commodity money (Chapter 4.28). As the connection
to other commodities like grain and cattle receded into the past, the
metal coins became true commodity money – money with a value in
the commodity market as well as a value as money. It was no longer a
receipt for something else. However, the historical record of variable
weight coins suggests that up until the Middle Ages, the stamp of
authority on a coin was more important than its weight.

Governor Meyer and many economists are also wrong that over
time, precious metals, specifically silver and gold, became dominant
forms of payment. The use of receipts and accounts for precious metal-
measured money has nearly always been a far more widespread and
dominant form of money, than the coins themselves. Today, coins are
purely for convenience, because they cost more to produce than their
defined value, and all forms of cash represent about 3 percent of the
global supply of money – at most.

A failure to understand the true nature of money is a serious handicap
in someone governing or teaching about our money system – as our
current situation shows. **When reading any economist or monetary
theorist, note their story of the origin of money because this will
be the foundation upon which they build their theories of what
money is and how it works.**

We’ll pick up our history in the next section with kinds of money.

