---
layout: chapter
date: 2018-09-15T17:00:00.000Z
title: Bridge
subtitle: public banking & money creation
section-number: 80
chapter-number: 7
next-section: 81
chapter-end: true
share: true
comments: false
comments-locked: false
left-aside: true
right-aside-top: true
right-aside-bottom: true
bottom-cta: true
download: false
pin-it: true
categories:
  - book
  - chapter-7
  - section-80
tags:
  - money
---
Public banking is a step toward a level playing field: let government
get in on the game. Public banking can be a useful bridge, though
it will not address the most serious issue in our current system:
exponential growth.

We know whoever has the power to create new money, has the
power to control society. There’s a lot to be said for local control over
local resources. Every municipality, county and state could establish
their own public bank. If the banking system remains the same – a
no reserve, money creation and banking system – then why not
establish public banks to create new money by issuing loans to their
municipality? The private bankers have blazed this trail to enrich a
few. **Why not walk it for the general welfare?**

## Local, state & regional public banks

### A public bank can:

### Hold deposits
Hold all the deposits of government entities. For example, in my
hometown we could have a Portland Public Bank. It would hold the
deposits of all Portland public enterprises. Like any small local bank,
it would probably contract out a lot of its transfer services.

### Create money

Just like small private banks today, a public bank could use these
deposits as reserves and create money by making loans for municipal
projects. When the citizens vote for a bond measure to improve
school facilities, the bank would take the IOU from the public, and
create the money just as a private bank does. The money-creation
loan is guaranteed by Portland’s common wealth, and its ability to
collect taxes into the future to repay the debt. Significantly, the Portland Public Bank could operate as a non-profit
and charge only basic bank function costs. It need not charge the
city interest, dramatically cutting the cost of most big infrastructure
projects in half. This would make citizens’ taxes go much further!
Public banks could make loans to private parties for worthy
projects...a new stadium, a revitalized commercial center. This is
already done under our current system, but instead of the public
creating the money for these projects, the public borrows the money
from the private bankers, who create it, and then the public pays
interest and/or takes the risk as part of a partnership with the private
bankers. Allowing private banks to create money for municipal
projects is a giveaway to bank shareholders.

### Reduce costs and cut taxes

Worth repeating: a public bank could reduce the cost of public
projects by eliminating interest on borrowing. Reducing costs could
reduce the need for taxes – a big win. For example, in November
2016, California passed Proposition 51 which authorizes a $9 billion
bond to pay for K-12 and community college facility maintenance
and improvements. On top of the $9 billion, the state estimates it will
pay another $8.9 billion in interest.^13 A perfect example of how either
a public bank or common wealth money could get double the results
or use half the money.

Taxes could be cut or government could spend the interest savings on
improving the common wealth, which creates jobs and increases the
circulation of money.

### Slow exponential growth

If the public bank eliminates interest on its loans, this would
eliminate some of the pressure for ongoing exponential growth in the
national economy. The bank could maintain an asset base (money
created) in proportion to the city and its infrastructure demands.

Public banking is a step in the right direction, and well worth
attention and consideration. It may be a bandage that cannot
cure the disease, but it could certainly slow down the death of
our economy and our democracy. It might make time for a more
substantial change in our system that would allow us to survive into
the long-term future.
Creating these public banks now could be a useful bridge to systemic
change later. And, local public banks established now could later
do a designated share of money creation in a common wealth
money system.

## A public-private partnership

Taking the notion of public banks to the national level, we could
leave the privilege of money creation with the private bankers, but
pass a law requiring them to give the government a cut of the action.
Basically, this proposal asks government to clearly acknowledge banks’
privilege of creating our money.

For example, in his book, _The Money Problem; Rethinking Financial
Regulation_ (2016),^14 US based law professor and former treasury
advisor Morgan Ricks uses many of the same words to describe the
problem as other reformers, but like the Modern Money Theorist
economists, he uses the word sovereign to mean national. He is not
advocating a change in the current system, he advocates establishing
a clearer legal framework for the existing system of private bank debt-
credit money creation.

This legal framework would limit the ability of banks to expand their
money creation into the shadow-banking world of off balance sheet
shenanigans. And, in his proposal, in exchange for removing any
limits on deposit insurance, the government would get a slice of the
banks’ profit pie. In exchange for having taxpayers guarantee every
single dollar the banks create, we’d get a cut.

Mr. Ricks solution does nothing to address the privilege of the private
bankers to rule our government and our economy that accompanies
there existing privilege to create our money.

## A bridge, not solution

My concerns about the public bank options – whether for individual
local public banks, or creating a legal framework allowing the private
banks to continue to create our money under a silent partnership
deal – are that the system itself does not change; it remains an
exponentially growing money system privileging a few over
promoting an increase in the common wealth.

A public bank or private-public bank partnership that continues
to use our current money creation system, will require exponential
growth. As noted, any exponential growth system is unsustainable
and destructive of our home planet. Allowing public banks to
exercise the same credit-based money creation privileges of the
private bankers will not change the long-term consequences of our
money system. It will slow down the exponential growth, but we will
still be on that path to destruction.

However, the publicly owned Bank of North Dakota which was
formed in 1919 by legislative action provides legal precedence.
Because cities and states could become bankers in our existing system,
this is a more easily accomplished change. It is easier to make change
at the local and state level than for the entire nation. And, it is easier
to change a part of the system than to change the whole system. A
robust system of public banks could be an important bridge to
transition to a full commonwealth money system. These public banks
could then continue to play a role in commonwealth money creation
at the local level.

CAUTION: People mean different things by _public banking._ Some are
referring to a revolving loan _bank,_ that does not create money, such
as the North Dakota Bank. Others are referring to a public bank
that functions just as the private banks do – creating money for their
customers. Ask, what advocates mean.

For further advocacy on this option go to the Public Banking
Institute, [http://www.publicbanking.org.](http://www.publicbanking.org.) As I understand them, they are not
advocating a bank that competes head-to-head with private banks.

Their concept is more like a revolving-credit fund. They have a rich
trove of essays on banking and money creation in general. And there
are local groups in many communities, including Portland, Oregon.
Ellen Brown, Founder of the Public Banking Institute is the author of
the _Web of Debt_ (2008), and _The Public Bank Solution; from Austerity
to Prosperity_ (2013), and many insightful essays on her blog.^15

## Endnotes
7.77 Step Backwards – Fewer Laws:
Free Market Banking & Money Creation
1 Hayek, F.A. Denationalisation of Money: The Argument Refined. Coronet Books, Inc.
3rd Edition. 1990.
2 Hayek. Ibid.
7.78 Step Backwards: Return to the ‘Gold Standard’ or Gold
3 Greenspan, Alan. “Gold and Economic Freedom.” Published in Ayn Rand’s
“Objectivist” newsletter in 1966, and reprinted in her book, Capitalism: The
Unknown Ideal, in 1967. Available from the Constitution Society: https://constitution.
org/mon/greenspan_gold.htm
4 Forbes, Steve. “Advance Look: What the new gold Standard Will Look Like.”
Forbes. May 27, 2013. https://www.forbes.com/sites/steveforbes/2013/05/08/
heres-what-a-new-gold-standard-could-look-like/#230ba1533a3d
5 Newman, Alex. “Texas Launches Gold-backed Bank, Challenging
Federal Reserve.” NewAmerican.com. July 15, 2015.
https://www.thenewamerican.com/economy/economics/
item/21271-texas-launches-gold-backed-bank-challenging-federal-reserve
6 Hunt, H.L. Alpaca. Dallas 1, Texas, USA: H.L. Hunt Press. 1960.
7 Iskyan, Kim. “Here’s the story of how the Hunt brothers tried to corner the silver
mar ket.” Business Insider. May 17, 2016. https://www.businessinsider.com/
hunt-brothers-trying-to-corner-silver-market-2016-5
7.79 Bandages: More Laws
8 Ensign, Rachel Louise. “Biggest Three Banks Gobble Up $2.4 Trillion in New
Deposits Since Crisis.” The Wall Street Journal. March 22, 2018. https://www.wsj.
com/articles/biggest-three-banks-gobble-up-2-4-trillion-in-new-deposits-since-
crisis-1521711001
9 “US Number of Commercial Banks Historical Data.” YCharts. Retrieved August 2,

2018.https://ycharts.com/indicators/us_number_of_commercial_banks
10 Federal Reserve Financial Reports. Ibid.
11 U.S. Department of the Treasury. Fiscal Service, Federal Debt Held by Foreign and
International Investors [FDHBFIN], retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis; https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/FDHBFIN, August 3, 2018.
12 Bank of England. “First non-bank payment service provider
(PSP) directly accesses UK payment system.” Published on April
18, 2018. https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/2018/april/
non-bank-psp-access-to-the-payments-system-announcement
7.80 Bridge: Public Banking & Money Creation
13 State of California. Election Archives. General Election November 8, 2016:
Proposition 51: School Bonds. Funding for K-12 School and Community College
Facilities. Initiative Statute. [http://vigarchive.sos.ca.gov/2016/general/en/quick-](http://vigarchive.sos.ca.gov/2016/general/en/quick-)
reference-guide/51.htm
14 Ricks, Morgan. The Money Problem: Rethinking Financial Regulation. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press. First Edition. 2016.
15 Brown, Ellen Hodgson. Web of Debt: The Shocking Truth About Our Money
System And How We Can Break Free. Third Edition. Baton Rouge, Louisiana: Third
Millennium Press. 2008.
And The Public Bank Solution: From Austerity to Prosperity. 2013.
